first draft kubernetes chapter (#82)
adoptingerlang/adoptingerlang: adoptingerlang.org

- [[https://github.com/kubernetes/minikube][minikube]]: The oldest and most flexible option, that is also now an official part of the Kubernetes project. =minikube= offers support for various hypervisors and has an option to run without creating a new virtual machine, but it still suggests doing so within a Linux VM.
- [[https://snapcraft.io/docs/installing-snapd][k3s]] and [[https://github.com/rancher/k3d][k3d]]: k3s is lightweight Kubernetes from [[https://rancher.com/][Rancher Labs]]. k3s removes legacy and non-default features to cut down on size and replaces etcd with SQLite3, making k3s a good option for CI and local testing. k3d is a helper for running k3s in Docker.
- [[https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/][kind]]: Kubernetes in Docker is a projected backed by a [[https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs][Kubernetes SIG]] for running Kubernetes in Docker originally for testing Kubernetes itself.
- [[https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-mac/#kubernetes][Docker for Mac Kubernetes]]: The easiest to get going with when running on MacOS.

> 

Author: Good point. Will mention microk8s as the specific one to use unless on OSX in which case docker kubernetes.

+S ${SCHEDULERS}
#+END_SRC

> In the next section we will see how using an environment variable =${SCHEDULERS}= set through Kubernetes' [[https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/environment-variable-expose-pod-information/#the-downward-api][Downward API]] makes it easy to adjust the number of schedulers when we want to change the CPU limits in the Kubernetes resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next section we will see how using the environment variable =${SCHEDULERS}=, set through Kubernetes' [[https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/environment-variable-expose-pod-information/#the-downward-api][Downward API]], makes it easy to adjust the number of schedulers when we want to change the CPU limits in the Kubernetes resource.
```

**** Container Environments and ConfigMaps

> As we've seen in the Releases chapter, runtime configuration is done through environment variable substitution in =vm.args.src= and =sys.config.src=. We therefore have to insert those variable to the environment of the container. Each container in a Kubernetes Pod can have a field =env= declaring a set of environment variables. The simplest case is explicitly providing a =name= and a =value=:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we've seen in the Releases chapter, runtime configuration is done through environment variable substitution in =vm.args.src= and =sys.config.src=. We therefore have to insert those variables to the environment of the container. Each container in a Kubernetes Pod can have an =env= field declaring a set of environment variables. The simplest case is explicitly providing a =name= and a =value=:
```

#+BEGIN_SRC yaml
env:
- name: LOGGER_LEVEL
  value: error
#+END_SRC

This configuration would result in the environment variable =LOGGER_LEVEL= with value =error=.

There are other environment variables that must be set based on the state of the container that is running. Two examples of this are setting the =NODE_IP= variable based on the IP of the Pod and setting the =SCHEDULERS= based on the CPU limits using Kubernetes' [[https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/environment-variable-expose-pod-information/#the-downward-api][Downward API]]:

#+BEGIN_SRC yaml
env:
- name: NODE_IP
  valueFrom:
    fieldRef:
      fieldPath: status.podIP
- name: SCHEDULERS
  valueFrom:
    resourceFieldRef:
      containerName: service-discovery
      resource: limits.cpu
      divisor: 1
#+END_SRC

> The =fieldRef= =status.podIP= will return the current Pod's IP when it is created and the =resourceFieldRef= of =limits.cpu= with a =divisor= of =1= will return the CPU limit in a unit of CPU cores.

Reviewer: is this intended to say `The =fieldRef='s =status.podIP=` or something? It's a bit unclear. Or maybe `The =status.podIP= declaration under =fieldRef= will return ...`

Author: The latter. I've pushed an update.

> The user defined environment variables like =LOGGER_LEVEL= can be better tracked in a Kubernetes resource specifically for configuration called a =ConfigMap=. A =ConfigMap= contains key-value pairs and can be populated from files, directories of files or literal values. Here we will use a literal value to set =LOGGER_LEVEL= to =error=:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user-defined environment variables like =LOGGER_LEVEL= can be better tracked in a Kubernetes resource specifically for configuration called a =ConfigMap=. A =ConfigMap= contains key-value pairs and can be populated from files, directories of files or literal values. Here we will use a literal value to set =LOGGER_LEVEL= to =error=:
```

#+BEGIN_SRC yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: configmap
data:
  LOGGER_LEVEL: error

> #+END_SRC

Reviewer: What's the difference between doing it in a configmap and just the env as earlier? Just because there's better tracking? What makes it better tracking?

Author: The schedulers? They are moved because it is using the "downward api" in the Deployment in order to calculate the number of schedulers based on the CPU limit instead of having to manually configure it.

**** Init Containers

Our release of =service_discovery= depends on a Postgres database for storing state, to ensure the database is properly setup before running our containers we will use an [[https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/init-containers/][Init Container]]. Each =Init Container= is a container that runs to completion before any of the main containers in a Pod are run. The database migration tool =flyway= we are using for running migrations is used to validate the database is up to date before allowing the main containers to run:

#+BEGIN_SRC yaml
volumes:
- name: migrations
  emptyDir:
    medium: Memory

initContainers:
- name: flyway
  image: boxfuse/flyway:5.2.4
  args:
  - "-url=jdbc:postgresql://$(POSTGRES_SERVICE):5432/discovery"
  - -user=discovery
  - -password=password
  - -connectRetries=60
  - validate
  volumeMounts:
  - name: migrations
    mountPath: /flyway/sql

- name: service-discovery-sql
  image: service_discovery
  command: ["/bin/sh"]
  args: ["-c", "cp /opt/service_discovery/sql/* /flyway/sql"]
  volumeMounts:
    - name: migrations
      mountPath: /flyway/sql
#+END_SRC

> The volume =migrations= exists only in memory and is used to copy the current SQL migration files from the release image to a shared directory that the =flyway= container will use to run validation. The =emptyDir= type of volume with =medium= =memory= is used because we are not using this volume to persist any data, only to share between two =Init Contianers=. If =medium: Memory= was not included the =emptyDir= is created on the host file system but it is still empty initially for each new =Pod= and is removed when the =Pod= is deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The volume =migrations= exists only in memory and is used to copy the current SQL migration files from the release image to a shared directory that the =flyway= container will use to run validation. The =emptyDir= type of volume with =medium= =memory= is used because we are not using this volume to persist any data, only to share between two =Init Containers=. If =medium: Memory= was not included, the =emptyDir= is created on the host file system but it is still empty initially for each new =Pod=, and is removed when the =Pod= is deleted.
```

**** Readiness and Liveness Probes

> Kubernetes has multiple configurable probes to know when to restart a container and when a container is in a state it can accept traffic. The main two are the liveness and readiness probes, which handle container restart and whether traffic can be sent respectively. Additionally, a startup probe can be used to delay when the liveness and readiness probe start being checked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes has multiple configurable probes to know when to restart a container and when a container is in a state it can accept traffic. The main two are the liveness and readiness probes, which respectively handle container restart and whether traffic can be forwarded. A startup probe can be added to delay when the liveness and readiness probes start being checked.
```

Reviewer: changed wording a bit, dropped some adverbs.

> Probes are defined as either a command to execute in the container, a HTTP =GET= request to make to a port and path or an attempt to open a TCP connection to a specific port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Probes are defined either as a command to execute in the container, as an HTTP =GET= request made to a given port and path, or as an attempt to open a TCP connection to a specific port.
```

> A =livenessProbe= is not necessarily needed. If the process in the container crashes or stop for any reason it will be restarted. The probe ensures that if our node does not crash but for some reason has deadlocked and can not respond to requests it will also be restarted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A =livenessProbe= is optional; if the process in the container crashes or stops for any reason, it will be restarted. The probe ensures that if our node does not crash but for some reason has deadlocked and can not respond to requests, it will also be restarted.
```

Another use is to begin sending =503= status responses after receiving the =SIGTERM= signal from Kubernetes that tells the node to shutdown. It isn't required because Kubernetes will remove the =Pod= from the routes either way if it has sent it a shutdown signal, but this removal is not done before sending the signal, so for a period there will still be requests and readiness checks after the node has received the signal.

The only necessary thing to do for graceful shutdown is to delay =init:stop()= from running until the =Pod= is removed from the =kube-proxy= =Endpoint=. The process can wait up to 30 seconds before Kubernetes sends a =SIGKILL= signal that will force the process to terminate.

In =service_discovery= the =readinessProbe= is on a separate path, =/ready=, and with a higher frequency, every 5 seconds.

#+BEGIN_SRC yaml
readinessProbe:
  httpGet:
    path: /ready
    port: http
  initialDelaySeconds: 3
  periodSeconds: 5
#+END_SRC

The =readinessProbe= is also important to having successful rolling deployments with no downtime for the service.

**** Rolling Deployments

> Kubernetes =Deployment= resources have a configurable [[https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/#strategy][strategy]] for what happens when a new version of an image is deployed. The =service_discovery= =Deployment= uses a rolling update strategy, the alternative strategy is =Recreate= which means Kubernetes first terminates all =Pods= in the =Deployment= and then starts the new =Pods=. For the =RollingUpdate= strategy the Kubernetes =Deployment= controller will bring up new =Pods= and then terminate the old. There are two configuration variables to tell the controller how many =Pods= above the desired amount are allowed (=maxSurge=) and how many are allowed to be unavailable during the deploy (=maxUnavailable=).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes =Deployment= resources have a configurable [[https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/#strategy][strategy]] for what happens when a new version of an image is deployed. The =service_discovery= =Deployment= uses a rolling update strategy. An alternative strategy is =Recreate= which means Kubernetes first terminates all =Pods= in the =Deployment=, and then starts the new =Pods=. For the =RollingUpdate= strategy the Kubernetes =Deployment= controller will bring up new =Pods= and then terminate the old. There are two configuration variables to tell the controller how many =Pods= above the desired amount are allowed (=maxSurge=) and how many are allowed to be unavailable during the deploy (=maxUnavailable=).
```

  selector:
    app: service-discovery
  ports:
  - name: dns
    protocol: UDP
    port: 8053
    targetPort: dns
  - name: http
    protocol: TCP
    port: 3000
    targetPort: http
  - name: grpc
    protocol: TCP
    port: 8081
    targetPort: grpc
#+END_SRC

The =Deployment's= container exposed three ports and gave each one a name, =dns=, =http= and =grpc=. The =Service= uses those names as the =targetPort= for each port it exposes. With this resource applied to a Kubernetes cluster there will be an IP listening on those three ports that will proxy to one of the running =Pods=.

A proxy (=kube-proxy=) is used to route traffic to =Pods= instead of adding each =Pod= IP to a DNS record because of the rate of change for what =Pods= are actually running for a =Service=. If DNS were used it would require a low or zero time to live (TTL) and depend on the client to fully respect the TTL value. Having every request be routed through a proxy means as long as the proxy's data has been updated the right set of =Pod's= will be routed to.

> Kubernetes aware DNS services, like [[https://coredns.io/][CoreDNS]], will watch for new =Services= and create DNS records =[service-name].[namespace]= for each. When using named ports, like the three ports in the =service-discovery= =Service=, there are also SRV records created of the form =_[name]._[protocol].[service-name].[namespace]=. Querying the DNS service for the SRV record, such as =_http._tcp.service-discovery.default= will return the =Service= DNS name =service-discovery.default= and port 3000.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes-aware DNS services, like [[https://coredns.io/][CoreDNS]], will watch for new =Services= and create DNS records =[service-name].[namespace]= for each service. When using named ports, like the three ports in the =service-discovery= =Service=, there are also SRV records created of the form =_[name]._[protocol].[service-name].[namespace]=. Querying the DNS service for the SRV record, such as =_http._tcp.service-discovery.default= will return the =Service= DNS name =service-discovery.default= and port 3000.
```

There are a few open source options for working with Kubernetes resources. The two most popular are [[https://helm.sh/][Helm]] and [[https://kustomize.io/][Kustomize]]. Both are part of the Kubernetes project but have very different solutions to the problem. Helm uses [[https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/][Go templates]] for writing and rendering YAML. Some, this author included, find templating YAML to be overly complex, error prone and just plain annoying. Luckily, the other solution, =Kustomize,= does not rely on templates.

#+attr_shortcode: note "Helm 3"
#+begin_admonition
<p>Even if Helm is not used for deployment of your project itself it can still be useful for deployment of dependencies. There are a lot of <a href="https://github.com/helm/charts">Helm Charts</a> available and is likely how you would want to offer your project to the outside world if it was not simply for internal usage.</p>

> <p>There were a number of issues with Helm aside from the templating that we won't go into here, except to say that they are being worked out in the next major release, <a href="https://v3.helm.sh/">Helm v3</a>. As of this writing in November 2019 has release candidates available. So I would still suggest taking a look at the latest offering from Helm.</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<p>There were a number of issues with Helm aside from the templating that we won't get into here, except to say that they are being worked out in the next major release, <a href="https://v3.helm.sh/">Helm v3</a>. As of this writing in November 2019 has release candidates available. So I would still suggest taking a look at the latest offering from Helm.</p>
```

Reviewer: might want to update the info that was there in nov2019 since we are later now

        - -connectRetries=60
        - migrate
        image: flyway/flyway:6-alpine
        name: flyway
        volumeMounts:
        - name: migrations
          mountPath: /flyway/sql
      initContainers:
      - name: service-discovery-sql
        image: service_discovery
        volumeMounts:
          - name: migrations
            mountPath: /flyway/sql
        command: ["/bin/sh"]
        args: ["-c", "cp /opt/service_discovery/sql/* /flyway/sql"]
#+END_SRC

The trouble with using a =Job= for migrations is applying a set of Kubernetes YAML resources can not update the image of a completed =Job= and cause it to be rerun. Applying a =Job= of the same name with a different =service_discovery= image will result in an error. There are a couple options to deal with this limitation.

One option, which is still an alpha feature as of Kubernetes 1.16, is setting =ttlSecondsAfterFinished: 0= in the =Job= specification. With this setting the =Job= will be eligible for deletion immediately after completion. Then, when the next deployment applies the new Kubernetes resources a new =Job= will be created, instead of attempting to update the =Job= from the last deployment.

> Since the =ttlSecondsAfterFinished= options is still an alpha feature and requires manually enabling. You can try the feature on Google Cloud by creating an [[https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/alpha-clusters][alpha cluster]], but these clusters can only live for 30 days. An alternative solution is to manually (or with a script that can run in a CI pipeline) run migrations and delete the =Job= after completing a deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The =ttlSecondsAfterFinished= options is still an alpha feature and requires manually enabling. You can try the feature on Google Cloud by creating an [[https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/alpha-clusters][alpha cluster]], but these clusters can only live for 30 days. An alternative solution is to manually (or with a script that can run in a CI pipeline) run migrations and delete the =Job= after completing a deployment.
```

An advantage of running the =Job= separately from the main =kubectl apply= is the deployment can be stopped if the =Job= failed.

> **** Init Containers

Author: Forgot to fill this in, will add later today.

        image: service_discovery-sql
        volumeMounts:
          - name: migrations
            mountPath: /flyway/sql
        command: ["/bin/sh"]
        args: ["-c", "cp /opt/service_discovery/sql/* /flyway/sql"]
#+END_SRC

*** Tilt for Local Development

[[https://tilt.dev/][Tilt]] is a tool for deploying and updating Docker images and Kubernetes deploys locally for development purposes. The easiest way to get started with Tilt is using a registry within the local Kubernetes cluster. For =microk8s= a registry can be enabled easily, we will need DNS as well so enable that at this time as well:

#+BEGIN_SRC shell
$ microk8s.enable registry
$ microk8s.enable dns
#+END_SRC

To allow the host Docker to publish to this registry it must be added to =/etc/docker/daemon.json=:

#+BEGIN_SRC json
{
  [...]
  "insecure-registries" : ["localhost:32000"]
  [...]
}
#+END_SRC

Tilt works off of a file named =Tiltfile= at the root of the project. Stepping through the =Tiltfile= at the root of [[https://github.com/adoptingerlang/service_discovery][service_discovery]] it begins with:

#+BEGIN_SRC python
allow_k8s_contexts("microk8s")
default_registry('127.0.0.1:32000')
#+END_SRC

> =allow_k8s_contexts= restricts the Kubernetes context that Tilt will run against to =microk8s=, this is to protect the user from accidentally deploying their local development resources and images to an external Kubernetes cluster, like production! =default_registry= sets where to push Docker images built by Tilt, in this case the registry enabled in =microk8s= is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=allow_k8s_contexts= restricts the Kubernetes context that Tilt will run against to =microk8s=. This protects the user from accidentally deploying their local development resources and images to an external Kubernetes cluster, such as production. =default_registry()= sets where to push Docker images built by Tilt, in this case the registry enabled in =microk8s= is used.
```

Author: Outdated, I changed the wording here because it is now the default way Tilt works.

)
#+END_SRC

This image is built from the =Dockerfile= target =dev_sql=:

#+BEGIN_SRC dockerfile
FROM busybox as dev_sql

COPY apps/service_discovery_postgres/priv/migrations/ /app/sql/
#+END_SRC

It only contains the SQL migration files and uses =busybox= so that the =entrypoint= can use =cp=. The third argument to =custom_build=, =['apps/service_discovery_postgres/priv/migrations']=, tells Tilt to rebuild the image if any file in that directory, in this case the SQL migration files, changes. We will see how this image is used when we get to the kustomize deployment later in the =Tiltfile=.

The next image built is =service_discovery=, the main image used by the =Deployment=:

#+BEGIN_SRC python
custom_build(
    'service_discovery',
    'docker buildx build -o type=docker --target dev_release --tag $EXPECTED_REF .',
    ['.'],
    live_update=[
        sync('rebar.config', '/app/src/rebar.config'),
        sync('apps', '/app/src/apps'),
        run('rebar3 as tilt compile'),
        run('/app/_build/tilt/rel/service_discovery/bin/service_discovery restart')
    ],
    ignore=["rebar.lock", "apps/service_discovery_postgres/priv/migrations/"]
)
#+END_SRC

> Note that =rebar.lock= is explicitly ignored, this is because it gets rewritten at times when it hasn't actually changed and Tilt does no comparison to verify a change has actually occurred, so would needlessly run the =live_update= instructions when Rebar3 is run locally. The migration files are also ignored because that is handled by the other Docker image.

Reviewer: we should figure that out, because there's no reason to rewrite the lock file if it hasn't changed. I thought all deps were sorted for minimal disruption as well.

Author: They are sorted, but it still is writing the file for no good reason.

Author: Made a PR https://github.com/erlang/rebar3/pull/2214

The target is =dev_release= because we want the ability to do live updates simply by recompiling and restarting inside the running image:

#+BEGIN_SRC dockerfile
# image to use in tilt when running the release
FROM builder as dev_release

COPY . .
RUN rebar3 as tilt release

ENTRYPOINT ["/app/_build/tilt/rel/service_discovery/bin/service_discovery"]
CMD ["foreground"]
#+END_SRC

The =live_update= instructions will run in the container any time a file changes. Since a =dev_mode= release is used, the Rebar3 profile =tilt= keeps the default =dev_mode= of =true=, the update commands simply need to sync the =apps= directory to the running container, run =compile= and restart the release.

> Lastly in the =Tiltfile= the Kubernetes resources to deploy are configured and a watch is set to rerun the =Tiltfile= if any of the kustomize files changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the Kubernetes resources to deploy are configured in the =TiltFile=, and we set a watcher to rerun it when any of the kustomize files change.
```

#+BEGIN_SRC python
k8s_yaml(kustomize('deployment/overlays/dev'))

watch_file('deployment/')
#+END_SRC

> Tilt has built in support for kustomize so we use =kustomize('deployment/overlays/dev')= to render the =dev= overlay and pass to =k8s_yaml= which tells Tilt what Kubernetes resources to deploy and track.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tilt has built-in support for kustomize so we use =kustomize('deployment/overlays/dev')= to render the =dev= overlay and pass to =k8s_yaml= which tells Tilt what Kubernetes resources to deploy and track.
```

The important differences from the =base= overlay in the =dev= overlay's =kustomization.yaml= is the inclusion of the Postgres kustomize resources and a patch that is merged on the =base= resources:

#+BEGIN_SRC yaml
bases:
- ../../base
- ../../postgres
patchesStrategicMerge:
- flyway_job_patch.yaml
#+END_SRC

The =fly_job_patch.yaml= is used to configure the Flyway job to work with the Tilt setup:

#+BEGIN_SRC yaml
# For tilt we make an image named service_discovery_sql with the migrations.
# This patch replaces the image used in the flyway migration job to match.
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:
  labels:
    service: flyway
  name: flyway
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      initContainers:
      - name: service-discovery-sql
        image: service_discovery_sql
        volumeMounts:
          - name: migrations
            mountPath: /flyway/sql
        command: ["/bin/sh"]
        args: ["-c", "cp /app/sql/* /flyway/sql"]
#+END_SRC

> This patch changes the image name in the =Job= resource to =service_discovery_sql=, the same name as the first =custom_build= image in the =Tiltfile=. Tilt will update the image with the latest tag, which it sets as =$EXPECTED_REF= in the environment of the Docker build command in =custom_build=, and rerun the =Job=. This way while =service_discovery= is running in the local Kubernetes if a new migration is added it will automatically be picked up and run on the database, keeping our development cluster in sync with our local development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This patch changes the image name in the =Job= resource to =service_discovery_sql=, the same name as the first =custom_build= image in the =Tiltfile=. Tilt will update the image with the latest tag, which it sets as =$EXPECTED_REF= in the environment of the Docker build command in =custom_build=, and reruns the =Job=. This way while =service_discovery= is running in the local Kubernetes if a new migration is added it will automatically be picked up and run on the database, keeping our development cluster in sync with our local development.
```
